This is Transistor FM.
Hey, product people, justin Jackson here and I've got
a brand new interview for you with
James Clear, who is the author
of Atomic Habits, a book that has
really changed my life since I've read it.
And I don't want to give too much of an intro. I just want to
get right into the actual interview. If you like
this, please reach out to James on Twitter at
jamesclear. And if you have comments about the episode,
reach out to me on Twitter. I'm the letter M. The letter I.
Justin. M I Justin. Here is me
and James talking about habits
and how you can make your life better one day at a
time.
The book your book's been out for a while. It's right here. Tomic Habits.
If you see it in an airport or something near you,
how long has it been out now? Today
is 100 days. Exactly. No way. Yeah, so
just over three months. I'm curious
because now it's been out for a while.
Is there one idea that your see
that people keep sharing? Like one idea that resonated from the book
in particular that gets shared more than anything else on Twitter
or wherever? So I was
curious about that myself when I was writing the book and thinking about it because
I kind of felt like, all know, hopefully all these
ideas are useful, but what's the one thing that people are going to latch onto?
Because sometimes you'll hear that from authors that there was one chapter
or something that was the chapter that really stuck with people.
Yeah. I'm grateful for the fact that there are a variety of
things, but
there are a few things. So the first one is Identity Based Habits,
which is chapter two. And that
concept really seems to have resonated with people. The
idea of trying to reinforce your desired identity and kind of starting with
who you want to become rather than what you want to achieve. Yes,
and I'm glad that it did, because that was the
chapter I debated over the most of where to put it in the book. I
had it at different points. It was the first chapter, it was the last
chapter. It ended up being the second one. I also had this thought
in my head that it should be like about midway through the book, so it
really jumped all over the place. But I ended up thinking, I feel like this
is one of the best ideas, so I want to have it early so that
people, even if they don't finish the book, they still come across this idea.
And I'm glad that that ended up working out
well. The other one that people bring up a lot
is the two minute rule and the idea of scaling your habits
down to the point where they take two minutes or less. I think that
that's life a very actionable one. It's like, okay, I know exactly what to do.
I wanted to do a workout, but now I'll just focus on doing five push
ups or I wanted to read 30 books this year and now I'll
focus on reading one page a day or something like that. Got you. So I
think the actionableness of that one also tends to stick. And
so going back to the identity one,
is this the idea that every
action you take or every habit you develop is a vote for the
person you want to become? Right? So that's kind of like my
core philosophy behind it. This idea
that the way that we develop
beliefs about ourselves, that we reinforce our self image,
that we develop our identity to a certain degree
is largely reinforced by the experiences and
behaviors that we perform over time. So some aspects of your
identity are relatively fixed. Like for example, if you're tall or
short. But even that idea that I am tall or I
am short, that's reinforced. You learn that through experiences in
life. Now, there are many aspects of your identity
that are less fixed than that but are still reinforced by
your experiences. So
if you write one sentence today, you probably don't
think about yourself as I am a writer, but if your do that every day
for six months or nine months or a year, at some point your turn around
and you think, maybe I am the kind of person who is a writer. Or
if you study biology every Tuesday night for 20 minutes,
you at some point think, I guess I'm studious. I keep doing this every
week. Maybe this is the kind of person I am. And so I like that
idea that our habits are like votes for the type of
person we believe that we are, that they build up evidence of looking
at ourselves in a certain way. And I like to
phrase it that way not only because I believe it's true, but also
beliefs and behavior are kind of a two way street, right?
So you'll hear people say things like, well,
just be positive or just believe in yourself or fake it till you make it
or things like that. And there's nothing necessarily
wrong with fake it till you make it. It's fine to be positive and
believe things about yourself. But it's a very short term
strategy because fake it till you make it is asking you to
believe something about yourself without having evidence for it. It's like
that kind of visualization stuff or mantra stuff where you look at yourself in
the mirror and you tell yourself I am a writer. I am a writer, even
though you haven't written yet. And so what I'm saying is
similar, but I think importantly different in the sense
that you let the behavior lead the way rather than the belief.
And I think that's the best lever we have for changing
the way that we look at ourselves, which is to say show up and write
a sentence every day, and soon you're going to have something to root that new
identity of I am a writer in. And it's a much more, I think,
robust and long term way of changing how you look at yourself. Yeah, I think
for the because you first
communicated that idea to me in an
airport in Denver. Yeah, I remember that.
And at the time in my life, I was
not doing so good. I was depressed.
I think cynical, especially, I think cynical about people
like you that seem to have it all together, that seem to be really
life, doing all the good habits. And
when you're not doing so good, looking at
someone that seems to have it all together
just can make you more grumpy or more cynical or more
whatever. But I remember you sitting down
and kind of hashing this out with me and that
idea of Justin, no
matter where you're at right now and no matter what you've
done, you could start today with
one action. So if you
go running today, that might not make
a big difference. But then if you do it tomorrow and then the next day
and then the next day and then the next day, at the end of
the week, you might say, well, wait a second,
I think I'm a runner, right? And maybe after a couple
of weeks you might say, well, you know, I'm going to get myself some runner
clothes and go and get some runner clothes and then I'm going to get myself
a good pair of shoes. I'm going to install that strava app.
And all of a sudden you could see yourself. That
was a really hopeful message for me when I was really
struggling to figure out it was way easier for me to be cynical and
just kind of look back at all these people implementing good,
healthy processes and say, well, that's not for me. That's just for
people. That whatever. But
hearing that gave me hope to think I could do
that, and it's surprising how
little time it takes to accomplish
that. Have other
people been kind of referencing that too? Is that
part of the and maybe that's what's so good about having it as
chapter two, because it gives your some hope. Right. Well,
what's interesting is that that process of changing in that way, it's
happening anyway. If you think back to the beginning,
for example, if I think of the early days of my entrepreneurial career,
well, I didn't have any entrepreneurs in my family. I didn't have any close friends
who are entrepreneurs. There was no reason for me to think that's who I am
or to feel like I was externally validated with, like that was part of my
identity. I had no evidence of it. And so early on, all
I had was hope. Right? Like the hope that, oh, maybe I'll be able to
build something, make I'll be able to make this work, but then you start to
show up. And for me, it was probably about two years in is probably
about where I kind of like the scale tipped, and I started to
think, I am an entrepreneur. That's part of who I am. But
it really took proving it to myself that I can
pay my bills through this, that I can actually
have a lifestyle and a career in this way. I had to prove it for
about two years before I really started to latch onto it and say, this is
who I am. Yeah,
my point is that's always happening.
You're continually updating your beliefs about yourself based on the
experiences that you're going through. And all I'm talking about is
simply designing that process in a little more careful
or thoughtful way, rather than just kind of letting it happen to you and be
like, well, I guess I'll figure out who I am. Based on what life throws
at me versus how about I figure out who I am based on the
votes that I cast each day and what habits I decide to follow.
Yeah. Again, that is a very hopeful
message for someone who's just kind of sitting back and waiting for it to
happen. What sustains you
when you're in the process but
not there yet? Like you mentioned,
entrepreneur and your, like, man, it took a long time.
It's a really good question because I think a lot of habits, entrepreneurship
is certainly this way, exercise is this way, where
the rewards of a habit are often very
delayed. What's the reward
for working out for, like, three weeks? Not really a whole lot. Honestly.
Your body hasn't really changed. The scale is probably about the same.
You're probably just sore. There probably isn't like, a whole lot to
show for it. It's really not unless you stick with that habit for
three months or six months or a year that you actually start to see
the changes you were hoping to get when you set out. And so there's kind
of this valley of death in the beginning where, in
a way, it sort of life gets harder before it gets easier. It feels
uncomfortable. You feel sore and pain. You feel
uncertain. When you walk in the gym, you feel like people are judging you. Same
way with starting a business. In a weird way, it's kind of harder before it
gets easier. You start out, but you're not making any money. You feel stupid a
lot of the time because you don't know how to make a sales call or
what customers are looking for or whether you're even offering the right
product. I remember when I first started,
like I said, I didn't know anybody, didn't have any entrepreneurs in my family. So
I was like, well, I need to get to know some people. So I sent
a bunch of emails to reach out and just ask if people would chat on
Skype for like 30 minutes or whatever. And I remember sending those first
few and thinking, do people even do this? Do people chat on Skype with
people that they haven't met before? Is this a weird thing to ask? There's just
a lot of that uncertainty early on. Yeah. So your
point is, I think, a valid one, which is, well, what do you do to
get through that? How do you kind of get through that valley of
death while you're waiting for the long term rewards to accumulate? Yeah, and I
think that this is where psychologists call it
reinforcement or an external reinforcer, but
you want some kind of reinforcement that is enjoyable in the
moment so that you have a reason to keep showing up. Okay. So
from a habit standpoint, there are kind of two ways to do this. First
thing is just a strategic choice about what type of habit you
choose to follow. So if we go back to the exercise example,
well, not everybody has to work out like a bodybuilder. You could
do Pilates or yoga or go for a run or rock
climbing or all kinds of stuff. And so pick
the form of a habit that brings you the most joy, that is
most enjoyable to you. It's going to be a slog for you're going to have
to swim for months to see a change in your body. Your going to have
to cycle for months. You're going to have to lift weights for months. It doesn't
really matter which one you choose. It's going to take a while. So you might
as well choose the one that's most exciting or enjoyable to you. Yeah.
Same way with imagine a reading habit. You don't have to
read. You might feel life, oh, I have a business, so I need to read
business books. But really, ultimately the most important thing is, do you get in
the habit of reading? Do you fall in love with reading? So if you need
to start with Sci-Fi books or fantasy or something like that,
well, start with that. Do the one that is intrinsically
valuable to you at first. And once the habit is built, then you can
transition to some of the other stuff. Yeah. So that's one
method for kind of getting through that valley of death. Yeah. And I
think this brings up maybe a harder
question, which is
based on your book, it's January and
I'm thinking, okay, I haven't been in the gym for seven years.
I used to love working out. I'm going to go, I got my
Streaks app on my phone, start going.
And I don't know, I've probably
been at least 18 days or maybe even 20 days this
month. So it's great. And I was surprised
by how fast I felt. So the first
day I felt like I didn't belong. Felt awkward. I don't know anybody here. I'm
walking in some of the machinery I recognize,
some I don't I have to get back into
a routine. I have to find which exercise I'm going to do.
There's all these kind of insecurities and questions,
but after a week, I kind of felt like I
belonged. But I wonder if that's because it
was easier for me.
I was already relatively in shape. So
there's a big difference between going in where you feel like, oh, maybe I'm
a few pounds overweight and going in and being 200 pounds
overweight. There's a big difference between going in even
as a white male, compared
to there's a big difference going in and feeling like, well,
I've done these exercises before, so I'm not completely out of my element.
And I'm wondering how
I mean, are are habits like that
achievable because of privilege and context and other things?
Like, how much does that play into it? And
if someone is walking in and they're 200 pounds
overweight, do they still have the
same chance of progress and success? It just feels like
such a big mountain for them to go over. For
sure. Yeah. So this is one reason why I
think starting with small habits is so incredibly important.
Because a lot of the time when we think about the outcome that you want
so just to continue your weight loss or exercise, example,
everybody gets wrapped up in like, oh, I want to lose 100 pounds, or I
want to lose 20 pounds or whatever the number is. But you
forget about there are all these little logistical and emotional
details that come along with starting a new habit. Yeah.
So I'll often tell the story about I have this reader who he ended up
losing over 100 pounds, and one of the first things he did was he went
to the gym, but he wasn't allowed to stay for longer than five minutes. So
he drove to the gym, got out of the car, did half an exercise, got
back in the car, drove home. And it sounds ridiculous to people. It
sounds silly because it's like, well, clearly exercising for five minutes is
not going to get you in shape. But what you realize is
he was mastering the art of showing up. Right. He was becoming the type of
person that drove to the gym every day. And when you're in that
state, for him at that point, that was the biggest shift, was,
can I just become the type of person who gets in here? Right. Who overcomes
the uncertainty or feeling uncomfortable or feeling judged?
And all those things are very real hurdles to building a habit.
There are all these little questions that need to be answered for something like that.
Like, okay, I want to go to the gym. Well, what time am I going
to go? Am I going to go before work or after work? What gym will
I go to? What route am I going to take to get there? Do I
need to bring a water bottle or is there like a water fountain at the
gym? And all those little questions like that,
whether or not there's a water fountain at the gym. It sounds small,
but if you already feel uncomfortable and feel like your don't belong and
then you always forget to bring your water bottle and you're like, oh, there's nothing
ever and there's never anything to drink there that's enough friction to get you to
quit in the beginning. Yeah. So starting with something simple, life.
All I'm going to do is I'm going to show up and I'm going to
do one exercise for five minutes and then I'm going to go.
That, I think, is a good way to start. And it reminds me of
what Steven Pressfield wrote. I think it was in The War of Art, where he
said something to the effect of, like, if you sit down each day at the
computer and you do your writing, at some point, at first it feels
uncomfortable, but at some point that becomes your territory. And I really
like that phrasing of it, because for an animal, for a wolf or
something, a piece of land does not become
their territory unless they spend time in it. Right. Unless they
are there each day. Yeah. It has to become comfortable first. And
so for many people, building habits, whether that's getting into the
gym or going to the yoga studio or sitting your butt in the chair and
writing, you need to make that space your territory. And that
the very first step is not getting a result, it's
spending time there. It's making that little bit of land
a zone where you feel like, this is where I belong each day. Yeah.
And that's a big emotional hurdle to cross before you
even worry about any of the physical or actual technical things to
do. Yeah. And I mean, the other thing that helped is I
went with my life. And it's funny because
I felt I'm like,
Mr. Confident, but she was like at one point she's like, justin, you
are so nervous right now. She could tell how
nervous I was. And I thought I was like, keeping it all together
and it just reminded me of like, I'd been in
gyms from the time I was in grade nine all the way through college. It
wasn't like it was unfamiliar, but I was nervous
because it was unfamiliar. There had been a seven year gap and
now I was like, exploring this again, worried about
what these people are thinking about me. Wow, that guy looks like he is way
more fit than me. All these thoughts go through your head
and so yeah, I think kind
of figuring out how you can make a step
and sometimes maybe it's like going with somebody so your at least have
some emotional because it's emotional. It's nice to
have someone to kind of share the emotional burden, right?
For sure. Well, if you come the thing that
ultimately what you're looking to do is, like we just said, feel like it's part
of your territory. And because there are other people in that space,
what that also means is you're looking to feel like you're part of the tribe
who goes there right, that you belong with the other people who are in that
room. It helps to
what is a tribe? Well, it's a group of people that you get along with,
that you bond with, that you belong to over something else, over
some shared interest. And in other words, it's a group in a lot of
ways of friends, friends who share some kind of interest. So these are your gym
friends. Well, if you go with your wife, then you
automatically have at least one person in the tribe that you are friends
with that you do belong with. And so I think that helps you
get over that hurdle a little bit. You're no longer facing that
challenge alone. Before it was like, I am trying to get
fit. Now it is we are trying to get fit. And
that helps a lot with kind of the mental feeling of like, do I
belong or not? Yeah, I've also found sorry, I don't
mean to stay on this too long, but it's so fresh. That
the other thing I found myself doing because I'm interested in
the emotional friction behind habits. And so
the other thing I was doing is I was going in there
and I'm uncomfortable, so I'm trying to act really
tough, but I'm not tough at all. But
when people look at me, I'm kind of like scowling. I'm not being
friendly. I'm not being myself. And
I was thinking about that and thinking, like when you're kind of
inward focused and you're in a new environment and you're trying to
develop a new habit, but you're inward focused,
it doesn't really help. And so I had to kind of turn that around and
go, okay, I got to start being friendly. I got to start saying hi to
these people because if I wave at this person and it feels
good, like they respond with a smile and that
happens again next time and again next time, that's a little bit of
a reward for me. That's going to keep me going to the gym. But
if I keep going here with this tough scowl on my face
and it's hard because you
feel like you don't belong, you feel nervous and you kind
of default to these weird behaviors.
And it took a little bit of time, but I realized, okay, now I got
to get in the habit of smiling and
saying hello when I'm in the gym, not just being in my own
zone and pretending I'm somebody I'm not, right? Well, that's
one thing that kind of helps you start to belong or become part of the
rest of the like, just a friendly behavior helps you start to
develop friendships with some of those other people that are there. There was a
study that I wanted to cite in Atomic Habits but I couldn't find it to
track it down. But I read about it years ago where the
YMCA ran a survey. And when they surveyed people
who were joining the gym the thing that got them to join
were the different classes offered the equipment that was in the
gym. Basically, facilities and features were the things that got people in for the
first time. But then when they surveyed members who had been there for over a
year, the thing that got people to stick nobody mentioned features or
facilities. Everybody mentioned friendships. And so the people
who actually stayed at the gym or kept their membership were the ones who ended
up developing friendships with other people there. And I think you're right.
Ultimately, the thing that gets you to come back is like do I enjoy coming
here? Does it mean I get to see some of my friends? Does it mean
I get to hang out with people I like? Or it's really the sense
of belonging that gets habits to stick and
the action itself is just kind of like something that's happening along the way.
Yes, but there's a step before that that we kind of skipped over,
which is how do you even choose a habit in the first
place? How does that happen in the sense of
I might not know what's good for me?
So how does that come into this?
Yeah, well, there are a lot of ways to answer that question. So I'll just
share a couple thoughts that come to mind. So the first thought that comes
to mind is this question from I first heard from Seth Godin, which I think
is just a great question, which is what is it for? And so
this is a question that we need to ask ourselves when we're trying to build
a new habit, which is what is this habit for? What am I actually trying
to achieve here? Because the correct habit to choose is
very different based on what your goals are, what you're hoping to get
as an outcome, what kind of lifestyle you want.
For example, the habit of making 20 sales calls a day. Well,
if what it's for is to increase revenue and to build a
successful business, that's a wonderful thing. If you
hate making sales calls and you want to spend less time working and more time
with your family that could be a terrible habit to build. It just depends on
what it's for. So that's one
question to ask. But you are correct that we often don't
know what we need in the moment. And I
think part of that is just a challenge of life and a challenge of self
awareness and knowing what you need. But life is
a very complex system and so figuring out the right thing
for that is sometimes it's just impossible. There are too many moving parts. Yeah.
So I tend to default to two
possible answers. The first answer is we all need things
that are so boring that we don't think about them, but are incredibly important for
showing up each day. So did you sleep 8 hours? Are
you drinking enough water? Are you spending a little bit of time walking outside or
getting a little bit of sunlight? Do you exercise consistently?
Whatever form is interesting to you? Are you spending some time
reading and soaking up new ideas? I'm not saying you have to do all that
stuff every day, but my point is those are things
that most people would be like, yeah, of course you should sleep and read more
books and exercise. Everybody knows that's good. But your time is
almost never going to be wasted by making sure you do one of those
things right. It's a fundamental that's worth spending time on,
that's worth coming back to, that's worth reminding yourself of, even if you
aren't sure the ideal, perfect place to focus in your life.
So that's the first answer. Come back to the fundamentals. The
second answer is more broad. I can't
be specific with it because it depends on each person. But the broad
application is what I would call broad funnel, tight
filter. So whenever you're trying to figure out where to
focus, you need a really broad range of research. Try to get
as many options as possible, then apply a
really tight, strict filter to it and just focus on the one or
two best options that you found. Okay, so for example,
I just finished Atomic Habits a few months ago. So now I'm thinking, should
I write a second book? If I should, what should that be about?
And I don't know right now. So I'm in the broad funnel stage, so I
want to lay out as many options as possible. I want to brainstorm 1000
titles. I want to look at all the top books on Amazon. I want to
browse my best performing tweets and see if there's a possible thread for a book
idea in there. I want to look everywhere I can and just list all of
that stuff in the same spreadsheet. And maybe I got 1200 ideas
on there really broad funnel. But then I need to apply a
very tight filter. Is this something I'm interested in enough to spend two or
three or four years working on? Is it a topic of broad
appeal to a general audience? Are there going to be a lot of people that
like this? Is this something that people that I can
actually turn into something actionable? Can people use this in their daily
life? Is this a topic that has a lot of stories that I
could tell? Right? Can I actually make this entertaining or latch on
to other interesting stories to make the book readable? Yes. And those
are just some of the. Filters. But my point is that you want some
period of very broad exploration, and then once you have a lot of options,
you want to really tighten it down. Based on that question, what is this
for? So in my case, the question I'm using is, well, it's for
writing a good book, one that's highly actionable, one that sells a lot of copies,
one that people find useful and so on. Yeah. So I think
if you combine that broad funnel type filter strategy and that question of
what is it for? That can maybe give you some more specific answers.
But even if you don't come up with something good there, you can always focus
on the fundamentals. Yeah. And the other thing, when you
mentioned Seth, godin, he has this other line
which is people like us do things like this.
I love that line. I wish I had thought it up. But yeah, it's so
good. It's such a great mantra. And what's
interesting about it is, for
me, one thing that made me start thinking
about healthy habits was hanging out with people
who had healthy habits. And in some
ways, it was really lucky and fortunate.
Like, you guys invited me to that retreat. You did?
Yes. And in some ways, I'm thankful you guys invited a loser like
me, because I was, like, hanging out in that group.
I came, and at first I was cynical and grumpy,
and eventually, just looking around that group, I realized, man,
these people like this do things like this.
And my cynicism, which before would have been like, wow,
people like that do stuff like that. It went
down. And then all of a sudden, I was like, okay, well, if people
like this do things like this, that's what I need to do.
And I think for folks that are
thinking like, okay, well, how do I know what good habits are? There
are so many things that I would have
never been
what do you call it there's the stages of habits or whatever, but I would
have never even had the cue if I had not first observed it
and then noticed, like, oh, wait, they're doing that, they're doing that, they're doing that.
I'm the odd man out. And that's what motivated
me to want to pursue some of that stuff.
But if I hadn't been in that group and felt like, wait a second,
if I want to belong here, I got to
up my game, right? It would have never happened.
And so people like us do things like this has been really
helpful for me. Yeah, I love that phrase. And one of the
reasons I said that, oh, I wish I had thought that up is because I
think it applies so deeply to a lot of the ideas in
atomic habits. It applies to how
socially reinforced our habits are. I think this is I wrote about
this in the book. I mean, I have a whole chapter on it. Chapter nine
is all about that. But I think I still undersold
the importance of how socially reinforced our habits are.
And then it also references the importance of a
shared identity. I think that ultimately a shared
identity is really one of the most powerful forces for getting habits to
stick. If you look at
it in a big way, you can look at, like, religions.
Religions are really interesting places to look for habits. People get
in the habit of going to church every Sunday for
50 years, largely because it's reinforced
the other people in their neighborhoods go. The people on their block
go. They see their friends there. It's a very
socially reinforced habit. Same thing is true
in smaller ways. Like, let's say you move into a new house and you walk
outside on Tuesday night and you see all your neighbors have their
recycling bins out, and you're like, people like us do things like
this. Like, people who live in this neighborhood recycle on Tuesday nights. I guess
we need to sign up for recycling. And there are really
almost an infinite range of examples that are like that, both large and
small, where our habits are. We notice them
because the people around us are doing them, which is what the cue portion is
you referenced. We desire to do them. We crave
to follow through on them because by doing the same, we fit in
or signal to the other people around us, hey, I get it. I'm part of
the tribe too. It becomes easier to do it
because sometimes you have friends helping you out. It's like having a
spotter at the gym. Like, oh, people like us help each other out when
a set is hard. And then ultimately it becomes
satisfying because you enjoy being praised for
it. Other people are like, hey, it was great to see you at church on
Sunday, or, really good job on that workout today.
And that feels good to be praised for fitting
in. And so in that way, socially
reinforced habits or the collective
identity, it hits all four stages of habit
formation. And I knew
that when I was writing it, but I don't think I gave it as much
importance as I should have. It's a very powerful driver of behavior in the long
run. Yeah, totally. And I think this is why
cynicism is such a toxic
attitude. And
I guess I'm in Gen X. I'm born in 1980. There's
a lot of cynicism in Gen X. And then millennials also have
a little bit of this too. And
actually, to be honest, everybody has it. Baby boomers have it. When if you're a
50 year old programmer and you get hired at a
startup where the CEO is 20 years old, we kind
of default to cynicism.
And it's such a blocker when
you're trying to observe those norms, like, oh, wait, people like
us do things like this. Cynicism allows you to go, well, yeah,
people like that do stuff like that. That's good for them, that's good for
James Clear, but that's not good for
me. And what I'm trying to
kind of reveal from my experience for
anyone that ever watches this or listens to this is that you really do need
to step outside that and at least be open
to this idea that your life could get
better, and it could just be going. Okay, well,
I'm going to vote for who I'm going to be today, and I'm going to
vote for who I'm going to be tomorrow, and I'm going to keep going. The
other thing in the book that really helped me, and I'm probably going to butcher
it. So you clean up after I do it, but you show this grid.
So imagine, like, on this side of your day, it's like, okay, I
make a good decision, so it goes up, and then I make another good
decision goes up, but then I make a bad decision. Like, I eat a
tub of ice cream, and sometimes eating the tub
of ice cream is like, debilitating. It's like,
well, I'm done. I ate the tub of ice cream.
I suck at this. I'm just going to go get into bed and forget about
it. And in your grid, you show, wait, but you're still up
here. You can just make another good decision, and
then you're back up again. And I like that idea of kind of
navigating your ideas, not being so hard on ourselves. Did
I kind of get that right? Yeah.
I don't know if you can see it, but this is the image. But
it's this idea that the difference between a good day and a bad day is
often just a series of choices, right. And you can win each little
moment, right? You can win each decisive moment. Just because you ate the
tub of ice cream doesn't mean you can't win the next moment. Yes.
One thing that I was thinking about when I wrote that is this concept that
I call decisive moments, this idea that there are a few choices
each day, maybe somewhere between, say, five and ten, that kind of
determine the next chunk of time. For example, there's
a moment for me each morning where I sit down and
either I open up Evernote and I start writing the next article I'm
going to work on, or I go to ESPN and I check the latest sports
news. Yeah. And what happens in the next hour
is really determined by what happens in the first 45 seconds.
Do I go to Evernote or do I go to ESPN? So
that is a decisive moment in my language. That's like a moment that
determines if I can master those 45 seconds, then I can end up
mastering the next your that comes afterward almost automatically. Yeah,
same thing is true. There's a moment each night, like 515 or so my wife
gets home from work and either we change into our workout clothes
or we sit on the couch and watch reruns the office and
order Indian food or whatever. And both of those nights are good
nights. But the moment to master is do we change into our
workout clothes or not? If we do that, it only takes a few minutes. Everything
else for the next 2 hours is already decided. We'll get in the car, we'll
drive to the gym, we'll do the reps. It's all pretty much done at that
point. Yeah. So the reason I like bringing that up or like thinking
about that is you start to realize there really
isn't that much that you need to master. Really. You just are
trying to focus your attention on a few key decisive
moments throughout the day. It's kind of like applying judo to your
life. It's like apply the pressure and the leverage at just the right point
and then the next hour kind of falls into place automatically. Yeah.
And so I like that because once you realize that once you kind of identify
those high leverage decision points, you can
organize your day and your environment around
those things. If I know that those 45 seconds where I'm
choosing between Evernote or ESPN is a real key moment,
well, I could install freedom and then I could block
ESPN from 08:00 A.m. To 10:00 A.m. And that
takes care of that decisive moment and it increases the odds that I'm going to
open a note instead. But anyway, so little
choices like that are easier to make once you've identified some of those key
points of leverage. Yeah. And you talk in the book life, there's some tricks
too, where you can make things automatic.
Like you talk about near a, y'all, buying
a little device that just shuts off his internet every night at ten.
Outlet timer. Yeah. And what's brilliant about that
is it shuts it off, especially if it's in the basement or
whatever, you're not going to go downstairs and fiddle around with it
and then that's what happens.
Right. If ESPN was really killing
you, you could just cancel your cable subscription. That might be a
bit but then you go to watch ESPN. You can't
right. It's done. By the way,
you mentioned this in the book too. But it's so funny how certain people's,
what is a trigger for some people is not for others. Like ESPN for
me is not a, that's not a temptation at
all. Yeah, it doesn't even enter your worldview. Doesn't enter my worldview. But
it shows you how identity is so much a part of this. Like if I
was hanging out with a bunch of Oilers fans every single day
and this happened in the office, there's a few people
and they're watching know on, on their
computers and I realize like if I want to talk to them, I've got
to start watching. Yeah. So people like us do things like this.
And so I started developing this habit of watching Oilers games when
before I. Didn'T even mean I think this is one of the
reasons why sports is so tribal, why people get so emotional about it,
is that it becomes a connection point for the
relationships. The game is actually no one would ever
say that because everybody acts like the game is the thing that matters the most.
But in a weird way, it's kind of a secondary thing, really,
when I think back. For me, sports is a way for my
brother and I to connect and for us to have something to text about and
chat about throughout the week. It's a thing that it's a reason for my dad
and I to get together in person and to go to games and hang out,
and it's all the other stuff that it provides that
makes it so deeply meaningful. And then
you end up assigning a lot of that emotion to how the team does on
the field as well. What the score is on the
yeah. It'S a good example there on that topic, then. And this is Corey
Stone is asking this in chat, but there's a lot of people on Twitter that
ask this too. Given that example that you just gave,
if your meaningful relationships are
engaging in habits that might not be good for you or that you want to
change, how do you navigate that? So if
you're really feeling like, I got to stop
watching sports, it's just like, I get a little bit and then I just go
crazy. But I still want to have a relationship with
my brother. This is where it gets complex, especially if your married
to somebody, your wife
is at least somewhat inclined to want to go to the gym, I'm
guessing. But if she was like, no, I just want to watch Netflix and
order Indian food, that's all I want to yeah. How do you start to
navigate those things? Yeah, those are good questions.
I mean, it's really hard because especially if it's a
person who you want to stay in, your know, I think first of all, I
just want to say so I have some things I want to add to this,
but I feel like it's worth noting that
this question comes up a lot. And I think the reason it comes up
a lot is because we all know that actually there isn't
a good easy answer and that it's just a hard part of life. You know
what I mean? It's one of those things we want to keep asking
about in hopes that, oh, maybe there'll be an easy way to resolve this. But
I think we all know it's a challenge. Yeah.
Now, that said, there are a few things you can do. So first thing
is sometimes your friends and family want to do something
different than how you want to change. So, like, you want to stick
to a new diet, they want to eat the old way or something
like that. Well, you want to start doing yoga, they couldn't
care less about yoga, they don't want to go to class with you, things like
that. Well, if that's the case, then for certain
habits you don't have to fire your friends and family to be
able to do that. But what you do need, or what can
be really useful is having a sacred space where that
occurs. Where I'm not saying you need to do this with me, but
just don't make it harder on me. Right. Just don't conflict with so
the yoga example is an easier one where it's like, well, maybe you need to
go to a yoga studio away from the friends and
family that aren't interested and start to build friendships with people who
are. I'm not saying you need to get rid of your old friends, but maybe
it'd be helpful to build a couple of new ones who are into yoga so
that you have a safe space for that habit to live. Yeah, so
that's one thing. Then there's the second piece, which
is sometimes you're building a habit that you do want
the person to join you on to come along with you. You're working
out and you would love for your spouse to join your at the gym or
something like that. And everybody knows it would be
good, but maybe they feel less comfortable there than you do.
Or maybe they feel you were previously an athlete
and they were not. And so you feel kind of comfortable in the gym. You've
been there before in years past. But for them it's like new and weird and
they feel like they're being judged and whatever. If you're dealing with a
case like that, the thing that I try to keep in mind,
and I can tell you from working with my own family, it can be incredibly
useful, is praise the good, ignore the bad. It's
very hard to do. The difficult part about it is
not doing it on an individual basis. It's that this needs to be the new
lifestyle for you. So when they do the thing that you're asking
them to do, basically another way to phrase this is
don't criticize people for doing what you were hoping they would.
There are so many times when the introverted kid in the family
will come down to the dinner table and it's like, oh, look who decided to
join us. And it's like, well they finally did the thing
that your were hoping they would do and engage with everybody and
now they just feel like they're getting criticized for it. Or
you go to the gym and your spouse decides to join you
and they do a few sets and then they feel like they're done and you
say, well, that was a pretty short workout when what you should
be saying is I think it's great that you got in here tonight, right? Like
you weren't feeling it, but you were still able to make it in. Yeah.
So praise the good, ignore the bad, and if you can do
that in the long run, what ends up happening is
everybody likes feeling praised, everybody life feeling
rewarded. It feels satisfying to
do something that the people who love you and who are around you praise you
for. And so at first you go to the gym and they say, hey,
I'm really proud of you for getting in here tonight. Good job. And it doesn't
seem like much, but then after two months and three months and ten
months of that, you turn around a year later and they might never even
say it, but implicitly, what they've realized is, damn, every
time I go to the gym, it feels good, they compliment me.
Now all of a sudden, you start to associate going to the gym with feeling
good. And this is a really long game play because
it takes a while for that to reinforce itself. But
same thing. Like the introverted kid at the table sits down and
they say something that happened today and it's like, oh, that's awesome. Thanks for sharing
that with us on that individual night. That one night at
dinner doesn't count for a lot, but if every time they speak up
they're rewarded for it, then all of a sudden now they have a reason
to start doing that more in the months and years to come. So it
takes a while, but I think that that's like an effective way to gradually
nudge people in the right direction. Yeah, there's someone in the chat that's saying they
need to apply that idea to themselves to avoid feeling guilty for not
doing enough. So instead of reinforce, oh, you idiot,
you didn't go to the gym again, you fatty. That's not
helpful. The self talk can work with
self talk as well. This is why I think small
habits can be so useful in some ways, even on the bad days. Because
let's say you're in that situation you just said, where it's like, oh, skip the
gym again. Well, you can still do one push up or one air
squat or whatever before you go do a set of ten air squats before you
hop in bed tonight, and it's not going to transform
your body. But that's not really the point. The point is to prove to
yourself that it wasn't a good day. I didn't have the best motivation
or energy. I had a long day at work, but I still am not the
type of person who misses workouts, right? I still proved to myself
I still cast a vote for being that kind of person. I didn't let a
day go by without doing nothing. And that
can count for a lot in the long run. And so sometimes small
habits are less about the outcome they deliver and more about the
identity they reinforce. Yeah. And I've actually found
another thing I'm
implementing in the new year is I decided
to quit drinking alcohol. And right now, it's
ostensibly for this goal of hitting a revenue mark. Once I hit the
goal, then I can have a drink. But the deeper
motivation for me was I just realized
it's a depressant. There's a bunch of reasons that it's
not good for me. And so my
excuse or my way of trying it out is saying, well, I'm going for this
goal, but it's been interesting in social situations because all
my friends still drink, and that's fine with me. But
sometimes just sharing the goal, oh, I'm just doing this because I'm going after this
thing. And you talk about how goals are sometimes
helpful in setting your direction, like, okay,
I'm pointed this way now, and sometimes
sharing that with people is helpful. The other thing is, I think eventually, if I
just keep doing this, just for me to say, well, I'm a non
drinker now. Yeah. And so I can still go
and have my favorite. And it's also
nice having a thing that you like. So my favorite non alcoholic
drink is a non alcoholic Caesar. It's like a Bloody
Mary. And to have that drink, it's, like, kind of
spicy. There's a reward there. I also have
this social crutch that I can use in a situation,
and if somebody asks me about it, I also have this new
identity, which is, oh, I'm a non drinker now, I just don't
drink. And you talked about that. There's some research behind that.
I know you've mentioned it a lot, but it's like, I'm trying to quit
smoking versus I'm a non smoker. Right. Is that
correct? Correct. Yeah. So I
think that can be really helpful. Yeah.
I think what you're explaining here, the situation that you're going through, this experience
you're having, is kind of it's illustrating this process of identity
change. Right. It started with, oh, I'm just going to put it off for a
little while while I'm attacking this goal. But then you're casting so many votes
for like, you know what? I haven't drank, and I'm kind of benefiting from it.
Maybe this is part of my identity now. Maybe I'm a non drinker
anyway. Yeah, I think you're definitely on the right track there. Yeah. And actually, this
is a good time to bring up two Twitter questions.
Maria Aldri asks,
how do your maintain habits? Ask him about maintaining
habits for people with depression, anxiety, or attention deficit.
Do you want to try to tackle that? Yeah.
So I've tried to be careful about saying that Atomic Habits
is about building habits and breaking bad habits, building good ones.
But it's not a book on addiction. It's not a book on depression. It's not
a book about anxiety or ADHD or any of these other disorders
or ailments. And I don't consider myself
an expert on addiction. However, something interesting has
happened. So I published the book, and I have had a ton
of speaking requests recently, and so I've been doing speeches at conferences and
companies and different events and whatever. And so
many times I get someone that comes up to me afterward or that asks a
question during Q A that talks about how useful the book was
for their son, who had ADHD or their cousin
was a meth addict and then was able to start to write the Ship by
employing some of these techniques or whatever. Yeah, which is great, which is very
gratifying. I still stand by my original statement. I'm not an expert on
addiction. I don't want to take a strong stance with this stuff. But what
I've realized is that the principles that I lay out in
Atomic Habits are really about how human behavior works.
It's about how habits are formed and whether that habit is something
extreme like an addiction or picking your skin or OCD
or ADHD or whatever, or whether it's something more
moderate like meditating for three minutes a day. Yes, the
fundamentals tend to be similar. And so I'm not going to
say that the book offers a prescription for overcoming addictions, but what
I will say is you'd be hard pressed to find tactics in the book
that wouldn't at least help, right? That wouldn't at least nudge people in the right
direction. I have heard from a few readers
who specifically have said that they had ADHD
and that they found the book very helpful. Environment design,
for whatever reason, has been something that's come up multiple times for folks who have
struggled with that. So I think it's kind of like if
you're the type of person who is less likely to just remember to do
it or just follow your to do list. If that's not
you, then structuring an environment where it's easier
to see the cues of your good habits, less likely to see the
distractions. Less friction between you and the good behavior.
More friction between you and the bad ones. If you place yourself in that
space, it's much more likely that you're going to fall through. So
those are things I talk about in chapters six and twelve, but I think
that the book applies, but I don't pitch it as like a
prescription for someone dealing with a more serious issue. Totally. Yeah. And I
would say again, I'm not an expert either, but as someone who has
been dealing with depression the past couple of years,
having a professional that your go to that deals with this stuff all the time,
like a therapist is so helpful, and
the therapist will be very interested if
you read James's book. So I said to my therapist, I'm like, your know, she
starts way back here and then she says, so what's new
with life? Well, you know, I read this book and I'm thinking, oh, what are
you thinking about doing? With that. Oh, I'm thinking about maybe
quitting alcohol. Oh, well, there's some
reinforcement from the professionals. And
likewise with my doctor when I
had depression and I went to my physician, she
said she gave me two prescriptions,
quit drinking alcohol and quit
taking any kind of cannabis. And
the reason is, she says, those are going to make you feel bad. Now,
the trigger in that case was my doctor. It's nice when you have a doctor
saying, listen, this is your prescription. Oh, and double the amount of exercise I was
doing. So three things.
So I did that for three months, and then I went back to my old
habits. But now I have that memory of what it was like for three
months. And it's been a powerful trigger for me to
when I am starting to notice my mood go down.
I remembered my doctor's prescription was quit drinking,
quit eating edibles, and doubling my
exercise. And that's been helpful for me personally. So I think
if you're reading the book, let your professional in your life know about
it is good. One thing I want you to do
is because I love the imagery and this is
probably unfair to you, is to give the ice cube example, but use celsius
instead of fahrenheit.
So this is an example from the first chapter of the
book. And actually, as a side
note, I thought about this. I was like, man, we're going to have to get
these changed for the foreign editions. It's going to need to be. But
anyway,
the core idea is that the process of changing your habits is well,
it's similar to what we talked about early on, that there's often this valley of
death that there's this period where you're just kind of building
up latent potential, but you're not really releasing any of the results
yet. And I like to equate it to the process of heating up an
ice cube. So you've got this ice cube sitting on a
table, right? And so let's say it's like negative three degrees in there,
right? So you're at negative three. It's cold, you can
see your breath. The ice cube is sitting there. You heat it up. Negative two,
negative one. Still there's. This ice cube sitting there. Nothing has
happened, right? Then you go from negative one to zero,
and all of a sudden you have this one degree shift, no different
than any of the other shifts that came before it, but you have this
phase transition, right, and the ice cube starts melting.
And that, I think, is indicative of what it often feels
like to change a habit. You're making these little improvements. You're trying to make
these 1% changes, these one degree shifts each
day. And it's really easy to get
frustrated or even depressed at that point. It's life. I've been running
for three weeks. How come I can't see a change in my body? Or I've
been writing blog posts for. Six months now, how come this site isn't popular
yet? And the key point there is your work was
not being wasted, it's just being stored. Complaining about sticking to a
habit for two months or three months or even six months or
a year and not having the outcome that you want is kind of like complaining
about heating an ice cube from negative three to negative one degrees and it not
melting yet. The work was not wasted. It's just being
stored. And I love that quote that's in that same
section from Jacob Reese, who it hangs in the locker room of the San
Antonios who've won five NBA championships. And it
says essentially, when I feel like giving up, I think about
the stone cutter who continues to hammer away at the
stone a hundred times without it splitting. And then finally on
the 101st blow, it cracks in two. And I know that it wasn't
the hundred that came there. I know it wasn't the 101st swing that did it,
but the 100 that came before. Right. And it's that same
idea. The reason the site takes off is not because
of the one viral article. It's because of the 55 that your wrote in
the weeks and months prior. The reason that you see a change in
your body is not because today's workout radically transformed you.
It's because you've been sticking to it for eight months now. And it's
really about showing up. Continue to put those swings
in, continue to raise the temperature by one degree, and eventually you
hit that phase transition where you can see the results of your work.
Yeah, and that image has been so
powerful in my life.
I've been telling people about this book and I actually notice
there's kind of like a coffee shop test. Like if I hear people talking about
something from internet culture in a coffee shop, like real
people, then something's hit and
Atomic Habits is like that. It hit
the kind of mainstream and that
image of just raising the temperature a little
bit every day now I feel like I'm a
few months into this and
I'm a little bit kind of like
evangelical about it. Now I'm like, God,
my life is so much better. And it's because
of just these little changes over time in the same
direction. Now I can see it. Now I can
see that I feel better. Wow, man, quitting alcohol, that
was one thing. And then, wow, showing up at the gym three or four times
a week, that really helps. And wow, like reading a real book every night before
I go to bed, all of these things keep kind of adding up
and do make a meaningful difference in your life, even
though way back when, when you're starting, you feel like, well, nothing's going to
help me now.
I want to be clear that these ideas have
meaningfully impacted my life. So, yeah,
I'm thankful you wrote that book. I'm thankful you talked to
me in the airport. It's been really great for me. That's awesome. Thank you
so much for sharing that. And ultimately that's what the whole thing is for,
right? I mean, it makes it feel like it was worth the effort to spend
a few years writing it and working on it, so that's great. So
before you go, some people are asking what recommendations for
system services, tools, trackers. I know you have a new
one coming out. Do you want to talk about that? Sure, yeah. So I got
it right here next to me, actually. So this is a Habit journal and we
just launched it two weeks ago and
it's basically a dot grid notebook. So if you're into bullet journaling or you're into
keeping a notebook or use a notebook, the vast majority of it are dot grid
pages, so you'll be able to use it like any normal one. But then at
the back there's a section with habit tracker templates.
And I don't know if you can see that very well, but I've been using
it. For example, this is this month, so you can see me tracking my habits
on here. Anyway, those
templates are in the back and they're also perforated, so you can tear them out
and put them on your desk or put them on your kitchen counter or your
refrigerator or whatever. Yeah. And then at the very beginning of
the book there is a section called One Line per Day.
So I've been using it for what happened today. And so I've been writing
down what happened each day and there are 31 lines,
so one for each day of the month and there are twelve of them. So
by the time you get to the end of the year, you should be able
to flip through and see I'm doing what happened today.
Sean Blanc does what's the highlight of the day?
Some other ones that I've seen are what am I grateful for? Or you could
use it as like a productivity thing. You could say like, what's my most important
task today? Things like that. So there are a lot of examples in
the back of a notebook, I have like 16 pages of examples of how to
use it. But anyway, it's called the Habit journal
and yeah, I'm excited about it. I think it'll be a good tool to help
people build better habits. Cool. And a lot of folks, I've heard from a lot
of folks that really like the audiobook, so if you folks aren't readers, go check
out the audiobook. People like us read atomic
habits. So
thanks again for your time, James. I really appreciate it, man. Awesome. Thank.
Your
there you go. Hope that was helpful for you. Like I
said, I really recommend the book Atomic Habits.com.
That journal that he's talking about is also available
there. Folks, it's 2019 and
if you are tired of bootstrapping alone,
I've been running an online community especially for bootstrappers,
solopreneurs indie makers, and it's called
Megamaker Club. Go to Megamaker Co
Club if you want more information. It's not open right now,
but you can sign up for the waiting list and I will talk
to you next episode. Thanks for listening. Your
podcast hosting is provided by Transistor FM.
They host our MP3 files, generate our RSS feed,
provide us with analytics, and help us distribute the show
to Spotify, Apple podcasts and more.
If you want to start your own podcast or you want to switch to
Transistor, go to Transistor FM
justin and get 15% off your first year.